Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the somatosensory system.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the organisation of the somatosensory system.
The somatosensory system is the part of the nervous system that detects and
processes sensation from the body — touch, pressure, vibration, position,
temperature and pain — and it is organised as a series of pathways from the
peripheral receptors, through relays, to the cortex,
with a consistent plan worth setting out.
The system detects several submodalities of sensation, each with its own receptors:
the mechanoreceptors for touch, pressure and vibration;
the proprioceptors for the position and movement of the body;
the thermoreceptors for temperature; and the nociceptors for pain.
The information is carried by primary afferent neurons,
whose cell bodies lie in the dorsal root ganglia, into the spinal cord.
From there it ascends to the brain by two main pathway systems,
which differ in the sensations they carry and in their route.
The information is relayed in the thalamus and projected to the somatosensory
cortex, which is organised somatotopically — mapped according to the body — with
the area devoted to each part proportional to its sensory importance,
giving the sensory homunculus.
So the somatosensory system detects touch, pressure, vibration, position,
temperature and pain through specific receptors,
carried by primary afferents from the dorsal root ganglia into the cord,
ascending by two main pathway systems to be relayed in the thalamus and projected
to the somatotopically-organised somatosensory cortex — an organised plan from
receptor to cortex underlying bodily sensation.
Describe the sensory receptors and the concept of the receptor and sensory unit.
The detection of sensation begins at the sensory receptors,
which transduce a physical or chemical stimulus into the electrical language of the
nervous system, and their properties — the way they transduce,
adapt and encode — determine the qualities of sensation.
A sensory receptor is a structure specialised to respond to a particular type of
stimulus — its adequate stimulus — to which it is most sensitive;
this specificity is the basis of the submodalities of sensation.
The receptor transduces the stimulus into a graded receptor potential,
by changing its membrane permeability; if this reaches threshold,
it generates action potentials in the afferent fibre,
the frequency encoding the stimulus intensity.
The receptors differ in their adaptation:
rapidly-adapting receptors respond to changes,
signalling the onset and offset of a stimulus and detecting movement and vibration,
while slowly-adapting receptors continue to respond,
signalling the maintained intensity, as for sustained pressure or position.
Each receptor responds to stimuli within a region — its receptive field — the size
of which determines the acuity.
So the sensory receptors transduce their adequate stimulus into a graded receptor
potential, which, on reaching threshold,
generates action potentials whose frequency encodes intensity;
with rapidly-adapting receptors signalling change and movement and slowly-adapting
receptors signalling maintained stimuli,
each with a receptive field determining acuity — properties that determine the
qualities and discrimination of sensation.
Describe the cutaneous mechanoreceptors.
The skin contains several types of mechanoreceptor,
each specialised for a different aspect of touch,
and together they give the rich tactile sense,
so it is worth knowing the principal types and what each detects.
There are four main types of mechanoreceptor in the glabrous, non-hairy skin,
classified by their adaptation and receptive field.
The Meissner corpuscles are rapidly-adapting receptors with small receptive fields,
in the superficial skin; they detect light touch and the movement of stimuli across
the skin, and flutter.
The Merkel cells are slowly-adapting receptors with small receptive fields,
also superficial; they detect sustained pressure and the form and texture of
objects, giving fine spatial detail.
The Pacinian corpuscles are rapidly-adapting receptors with large receptive fields,
deep in the skin; they are exquisitely sensitive to vibration and to rapid changes.
The Ruffini endings are slowly-adapting receptors with large fields;
they detect skin stretch.
In hairy skin, the hair follicle receptors detect movement of the hairs.
So the cutaneous mechanoreceptors comprise the Meissner corpuscles,
rapidly-adapting for light touch and flutter; the Merkel cells,
slowly-adapting for sustained pressure and fine form and texture;
the Pacinian corpuscles, rapidly-adapting and deep, for vibration;
and the Ruffini endings, slowly-adapting, for skin stretch;
together with the hair follicle receptors — a set of specialised receptors giving
the discriminative sense of touch.
Describe the dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway.
The somatosensory information ascends to the brain by two main pathways,
and the first, the dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway, carries the fine,
discriminative sensations, its features following a plan worth knowing,
since lesions of it produce a characteristic loss.
This pathway carries fine touch, vibration,
and conscious proprioception — the discriminative sensations requiring precise
spatial and temporal information. Its arrangement is as follows.
The primary afferent fibres, large and myelinated,
enter the cord and ascend on the same side in the dorsal columns,
without synapsing, to the lower brainstem, the medulla,
where they synapse on the second-order neurons in the dorsal column nuclei.
These second-order neurons then cross to the opposite side in the medulla and
ascend as the medial lemniscus to the thalamus,
where they synapse on third-order neurons projecting to the somatosensory cortex.
So the crossing is high, in the medulla.
Because of this, a lesion of the pathway below the crossing causes a loss of fine
touch, vibration and proprioception on the same side as the lesion.
The pathway preserves the somatotopic map throughout.
So the dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway carries fine touch,
vibration and conscious proprioception:
the primary afferents ascend on the same side in the dorsal columns to the medulla,
where they synapse and cross, ascending as the medial lemniscus to the thalamus and
cortex; the high crossing meaning that a lesion below it causes ipsilateral loss —
the pathway of discriminative sensation.
Describe the anterolateral, or spinothalamic, system.
The second main somatosensory pathway, the anterolateral or spinothalamic system,
carries pain, temperature and crude touch,
and its arrangement differs crucially from the dorsal column pathway in where it
crosses, which gives it a different and clinically important pattern of loss.
This system carries pain and temperature, and crude,
non-discriminative touch — sensations not requiring the fine spatial precision of
the dorsal column system. Its arrangement is as follows.
The primary afferent fibres, the smaller A-delta and C fibres,
enter the cord and synapse almost immediately on the second-order neurons in the
dorsal horn.
These second-order neurons then cross to the opposite side within the cord,
near their level of entry, and ascend on that side in the anterolateral part of the
cord, as the spinothalamic tract, to the thalamus,
and thence to the cortex and other regions.
So the crossing is low, in the cord,
near the point of entry — in contrast to the high crossing of the dorsal column
pathway.
This difference is clinically important:
a lesion of one side of the cord causes a loss of pain and temperature on the
opposite side of the body below the lesion,
but a loss of fine touch and proprioception on the same side — the dissociated
sensory loss of the Brown-Sequard syndrome.
So the anterolateral, spinothalamic system carries pain,
temperature and crude touch: the primary afferents synapse in the dorsal horn,
and the second-order neurons cross low, within the cord near their entry,
ascending on the opposite side to the thalamus;
the low crossing meaning a cord lesion causes contralateral loss of pain and
temperature — contrasting with the dorsal column pathway and explaining dissociated
sensory loss.
Describe the role of the thalamus and the somatosensory cortex.
The somatosensory information, having ascended the cord,
is relayed through the thalamus to the somatosensory cortex,
where it is brought to conscious perception and processed,
and the organisation of these structures is worth knowing,
particularly the cortical mapping of the body.
The thalamus is the great relay station of sensation:
almost all sensory information, except smell,
is relayed through it on its way to the cortex.
The somatosensory information is relayed in specific thalamic nuclei,
where it synapses on the third-order neurons that project to the cortex;
the thalamus also begins the processing and gating of the information.
The somatosensory cortex, in the parietal lobe,
is where the sensation is consciously perceived and analysed.
It is organised somatotopically: the body is mapped across the cortical surface in
an orderly fashion, forming the sensory homunculus,
in which the area of cortex devoted to each body part is proportional not to its
size but to its sensory importance and innervation density — so the hands,
lips and face occupy disproportionately large areas.
The cortex analyses the features of the stimulus and integrates the submodalities.
So the thalamus relays the somatosensory information — as it does almost all
sensation — to the somatosensory cortex of the parietal lobe,
where sensation is consciously perceived;
the cortex organised somatotopically as the sensory homunculus,
with the area for each part proportional to its sensory importance,
the hands and face being most represented — the structures of conscious somatic
sensation.
Describe proprioception.
Proprioception is the sense of the position and movement of the body and its parts,
essential for the control of posture and movement,
and it depends on specialised receptors and pathways worth describing,
since it is both consciously perceived and used unconsciously by the motor system.
Proprioception is the sense of the relative position of the parts of the body,
and of their movement — sometimes divided into the static sense of position and the
dynamic sense of movement, or kinaesthesia.
It depends on several specialised proprioceptors.
The muscle spindles, within the skeletal muscles,
sense the length of the muscle and its rate of change,
and so the position and movement of the joints;
they are the most important proprioceptors.
The Golgi tendon organs, in the tendons, sense the tension in the muscle.
Receptors in the joint capsules and ligaments sense joint position and movement,
and the cutaneous receptors contribute.
This information serves two purposes:
the conscious appreciation of position and movement,
carried by the dorsal column pathway to the cortex;
and the unconscious use by the motor system — the spinal reflexes,
and the cerebellum, which uses proprioceptive information,
carried by the spinocerebellar tracts, to coordinate movement.
So proprioception is the sense of the position and movement of the body,
depending chiefly on the muscle spindles sensing muscle length,
the Golgi tendon organs sensing tension, and the joint receptors;
serving both the conscious appreciation of position, via the dorsal columns,
and the unconscious control of posture and movement by the spinal reflexes and the
cerebellum — a sense essential to the control of movement.
Pull it together: how is somatic sensation conveyed from the body to consciousness?
I would draw it together by following the somatosensory information from the
receptor to consciousness, since the system has a clear and consistent plan from
periphery to cortex.
Sensation begins at the specialised receptors — the mechanoreceptors for touch,
vibration and pressure, the proprioceptors for position,
the thermoreceptors and nociceptors — each transducing its adequate stimulus into
action potentials whose frequency encodes intensity,
with rapidly- and slowly-adapting types signalling change and maintained stimuli.
The information is carried by primary afferents from the dorsal root ganglia into
the cord, and ascends by two pathways: the dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway,
carrying fine touch, vibration and conscious proprioception,
ascending on the same side and crossing high in the medulla;
and the anterolateral spinothalamic system, carrying pain,
temperature and crude touch, crossing low in the cord — the different crossings
explaining the patterns of sensory loss.
Both relay in the thalamus and project to the somatosensory cortex,
organised somatotopically as the homunculus, where sensation is perceived.
So somatic sensation is conveyed from the specialised receptors,
through the primary afferents, up the dorsal column pathway for discriminative
sensation and the spinothalamic system for pain and temperature — crossing high and
low respectively — to the thalamic relay and the somatotopic cortex,
where it reaches consciousness; an organised plan from receptor to cortex,
whose pathways and crossings underlie the clinical patterns of sensory loss.
Describe thermoreception.
The sense of temperature — thermoreception — is one of the somatosensory
submodalities, detected by specialised receptors and carried by particular
pathways, and it is worth describing,
as it has features distinguishing it from touch, and connects to thermoregulation.
Temperature is sensed by thermoreceptors — free nerve endings in the skin and
elsewhere, specialised to respond to temperature.
There are two functional types: warm receptors,
which increase their firing as the temperature rises over the innocuous warm range,
and cold receptors, which increase their firing as the temperature falls over the
cool range; together they signal the temperature and its changes.
The molecular basis lies in temperature-sensitive transient receptor potential
channels, different ones responding to warmth and to cold — the cold receptors
being activated also by menthol, and the warmth and noxious-heat receptors by
capsaicin.
The thermoreceptors are slowly adapting to maintained temperatures but respond
briskly to changes, so that a change in temperature is felt more strongly than a
steady one.
The information is carried by small A-delta and C fibres,
and ascends in the anterolateral, spinothalamic system, alongside pain,
to the thalamus and cortex for conscious temperature sensation;
and it also serves thermoregulation,
providing the input to the hypothalamic centres.
So temperature is sensed by warm and cold thermoreceptors — free nerve endings with
temperature-sensitive transient receptor potential channels — signalling
temperature and especially its changes, to which they respond briskly;
carried by small fibres in the spinothalamic system to the cortex for conscious
sensation, and to the hypothalamus for thermoregulation — a submodality with
features distinguishing it from touch.
Describe two-point discrimination and tactile acuity.
The acuity of the sense of touch — its ability to resolve fine spatial detail —
varies greatly across the body, and two-point discrimination is the classic measure
of it; understanding this follows from the properties of the receptors and their
central representation.
Two-point discrimination is the ability to perceive two closely-spaced points
touching the skin as two separate points, rather than one;
the two-point threshold is the smallest separation at which they are still felt as
two, and it is a measure of tactile acuity.
This acuity varies enormously across the body:
it is finest on the fingertips and the lips,
where two points only a couple of millimetres apart can be distinguished,
and coarsest on the back and the limbs,
where points must be several centimetres apart.
This variation depends on two factors.
First, the density of the receptors and the size of their receptive fields:
where the receptors are densely packed with small receptive fields,
as on the fingertips, fine detail can be resolved;
where they are sparse with large fields, it cannot.
Second, the cortical representation:
the densely-innervated regions have a correspondingly large cortical representation
— the magnified areas of the homunculus — providing the processing for fine
discrimination.
So two-point discrimination is the ability to resolve two close points as separate,
the two-point threshold measuring tactile acuity;
finest on the fingertips and lips and coarsest on the trunk,
depending on the density of receptors and the size of their receptive fields,
and on the magnified cortical representation of the sensitive areas — a measure of
acuity following from the receptors and their central representation.
Describe lateral inhibition and its role in sensory processing.
Lateral inhibition is an important principle of sensory processing,
by which the nervous system sharpens and enhances the contrast of sensory
information, and it operates in the somatosensory and other systems,
so it is worth describing as a general mechanism.
Lateral inhibition is an arrangement in which an active sensory pathway inhibits
its neighbours. When a stimulus activates a receptor and its pathway, that pathway,
through inhibitory interneurons, inhibits the adjacent,
less strongly activated pathways.
The effect is to enhance the contrast between the strongly and the weakly
stimulated regions — sharpening the representation.
For a touch stimulus, the most strongly stimulated point at the centre inhibits the
surrounding, weakly stimulated regions,
so that the centre stands out sharply against an inhibited surround;
this sharpens the localisation and improves the spatial discrimination,
enhancing the perception of edges and detail.
The mechanism operates at successive levels of the pathway — in the relays and the
cortex — and underlies the centre-surround organisation of receptive fields,
in which a central excitatory region is surrounded by an inhibitory one.
The same principle operates in vision and other senses.
So lateral inhibition is the inhibition of adjacent sensory pathways by an active
one, which enhances the contrast between strongly and weakly stimulated regions,
sharpening the representation, improving spatial discrimination and the perception
of edges; underlying the centre-surround organisation of receptive fields and
operating in the somatosensory and other sensory systems — a general mechanism of
contrast enhancement in sensory processing.
Describe receptive fields and the columnar organisation of the somatosensory cortex.
The somatosensory system is organised,
at the level of the individual neurons and of the cortex,
around the concepts of the receptive field and the cortical column,
and understanding these reveals how the system represents and processes sensory
information, so they are worth describing.
The receptive field of a sensory neuron is the region of the body surface which,
when stimulated, affects that neuron's activity.
At the periphery, the receptive field is the area served by a single receptor or
afferent; it is small where acuity is high.
As information ascends, the receptive fields of the higher neurons are built from
those below, and often have a centre-surround organisation — an excitatory centre
and an inhibitory surround, produced by lateral inhibition — which makes them
sensitive to contrast and edges.
In the somatosensory cortex, the neurons are organised not only somatotopically,
as the homunculus, but also in columns:
the cortex is arranged in vertical columns running through its thickness,
within each of which the neurons share properties — responding to the same region
of the body and often the same submodality, such as a particular kind of touch.
These columns are the functional processing units of the cortex,
the modality and the body map being represented across them.
So the receptive field is the region of the body affecting a neuron — small where
acuity is high, and often with a contrast-enhancing centre-surround organisation;
and the somatosensory cortex is organised in vertical columns,
within each of which neurons share a body region and submodality,
the columns being the functional processing units — concepts revealing how the
system represents and processes sensory information.
Describe cortical plasticity in the somatosensory system.
The somatosensory cortex, though organised as an orderly map,
is not fixed but can reorganise with experience and after injury — cortical
plasticity — and this is an important property, relevant to recovery,
learning and to phenomena such as phantom limb pain.
The cortical body map is maintained by its sensory input, but it retains,
into adult life, a capacity to change — to reorganise the representation — in
response to altered input. Several situations demonstrate this.
With increased use or training, the cortical representation of a frequently-used
part — such as the fingers of a skilled musician — expands, reflecting the practice.
After the loss of input from a part — by amputation or nerve injury — the deprived
cortical area, no longer receiving its input,
is gradually invaded and taken over by the representations of adjacent body parts,
which expand into it; this reorganisation, while it may aid recovery,
can be maladaptive, and is implicated in phantom limb pain,
where the reorganisation of the area formerly representing the lost limb is
associated with the pain.
The plasticity depends on mechanisms including the strengthening and weakening of
synapses.
So the somatosensory cortex shows plasticity — reorganising its body map with
experience and injury: the representation of a trained part expanding,
and a deprived area, after amputation or denervation,
being invaded by adjacent representations;
a property underlying learning and recovery but sometimes maladaptive,
as in phantom limb pain — the cortical map being dynamic rather than fixed.
Describe the muscle spindle in detail.
The muscle spindle is the principal proprioceptor, sensing muscle length,
and it has an elaborate structure with its own motor innervation,
which allows its sensitivity to be adjusted;
understanding it is important for proprioception and for the stretch reflex.
The muscle spindle is a sensory receptor embedded within the skeletal muscle,
lying parallel to the ordinary muscle fibres.
It consists of a capsule containing specialised,
modified muscle fibres — the intrafusal fibres — distinct from the ordinary,
force-generating extrafusal fibres.
The central, non-contractile region of the intrafusal fibres is wrapped by sensory
nerve endings, which are stretched, and so excited, when the muscle,
and the spindle within it, is lengthened;
so the spindle senses the length of the muscle and its rate of change,
signalling muscle length and movement.
Crucially, the intrafusal fibres have their own motor innervation,
by the gamma motor neurons, which cause the contractile ends of the intrafusal
fibres to contract; this does not contribute to the muscle's force,
but adjusts the tension on the central sensory region,
setting the sensitivity of the spindle — keeping it sensitive across the range of
muscle length, so that the spindle continues to signal length even as the whole
muscle shortens.
So the muscle spindle, lying parallel to the muscle fibres,
contains intrafusal fibres whose central region is wrapped by sensory endings that
sense muscle length and its rate of change;
its intrafusal fibres having their own gamma motor innervation,
which adjusts the spindle's sensitivity by contracting their ends — an elaborate
proprioceptor central to the sense of muscle length and to the stretch reflex.
Describe sensory adaptation.
Sensory adaptation — the decline in the response to a maintained stimulus — is a
general property of sensory receptors that shapes what we perceive,
emphasising change over constancy, and its mechanisms and significance are worth
describing.
Adaptation is the phenomenon by which, when a stimulus is maintained constant,
the response of the sensory system declines over time,
even though the stimulus continues. Receptors differ in their rate of adaptation,
and this determines their function.
Rapidly-adapting receptors respond briskly to a change in the stimulus but quickly
cease responding if it is maintained, so they signal the onset,
offset and changes of a stimulus — detecting movement and vibration;
the Pacinian and Meissner corpuscles are examples.
Slowly-adapting receptors continue to respond,
with a declining but maintained discharge, throughout a sustained stimulus,
so they signal its maintained intensity — detecting sustained pressure and
position; the Merkel cells and the muscle spindles are examples.
The significance of adaptation is that it makes the sensory system most sensitive
to changes in the environment, rather than to steady states — which is generally
more useful, since change usually carries the important information;
it is why we cease to notice constant stimuli, such as our clothes.
The mechanisms include properties of the receptor and accessory structures.
So sensory adaptation is the decline in response to a maintained stimulus:
rapidly-adapting receptors signal change and movement,
slowly-adapting receptors signal maintained intensity and position;
adaptation making the system most sensitive to change rather than constancy —
generally the more useful information,
and why constant stimuli cease to be noticed — a general property shaping
perception.
Describe the sensory innervation of the face and the trigeminal system.
Sensation from the face and head is carried not by the spinal nerves and the
pathways we have described, but by the cranial nerves, chiefly the trigeminal,
whose arrangement parallels that of the body but with its own features,
so it is worth describing.
The face and the front of the head, and the structures within — the mouth,
the teeth, the cornea and much of the cranial dura — receive their sensory
innervation chiefly from the trigeminal nerve, the fifth cranial nerve,
which has three divisions supplying the regions of the face.
The trigeminal system parallels the somatosensory system of the body:
the primary afferents, with cell bodies in the trigeminal ganglion, carry touch,
temperature, pain and proprioception from the face;
they enter the brainstem and synapse in the trigeminal nuclei — which are the
cranial equivalent of the dorsal horn and the dorsal column nuclei.
From there, second-order neurons cross and ascend to the thalamus and the
somatosensory cortex, where the face is represented — occupying, like the hand,
a large area of the homunculus, reflecting its rich innervation.
The trigeminal system mediates important reflexes,
such as the corneal blink reflex, and is involved in conditions such as trigeminal
neuralgia.
So sensation from the face and head is carried chiefly by the trigeminal nerve,
its three divisions supplying the face,
with cell bodies in the trigeminal ganglion;
synapsing in the trigeminal nuclei — the cranial equivalent of the dorsal horn —
and ascending, crossed, to the thalamus and the cortex,
where the face is largely represented;
a system paralleling the body's somatosensory pathways,
mediating reflexes such as the corneal, and involved in trigeminal neuralgia.
Describe the dermatomes and their clinical importance.
The segmental organisation of the sensory innervation of the body into dermatomes
is a fundamental anatomical and clinical concept,
of great practical use in localising lesions of the nervous system,
so it is worth describing.
A dermatome is the area of skin supplied by the sensory fibres of a single spinal
nerve, or spinal segment.
Because the spinal nerves emerge segmentally and supply the skin in an orderly
sequence, the body surface is mapped into a series of dermatomes,
arranged in bands — running around the trunk in a regular sequence,
and down the limbs in a pattern reflecting their embryological development.
The dermatomal map, though it varies somewhat and the dermatomes overlap,
is broadly consistent and is learned as a clinical tool.
Its clinical importance is in localisation.
The pattern of a sensory disturbance reveals the site of a lesion:
a sensory loss in a dermatomal pattern indicates a lesion of the corresponding
spinal nerve root or segment — so the level of a spinal cord lesion can be
determined from the upper level of sensory loss,
and a root lesion identified from the affected dermatome.
Dermatomes are also used to assess the level of a regional anaesthetic block.
The condition shingles characteristically affects a single dermatome.
So a dermatome is the area of skin supplied by a single spinal segment,
the body surface being mapped into an orderly series of dermatomal bands;
the map being a key clinical tool for localisation — a dermatomal sensory loss
indicating the level of a cord or root lesion,
and the dermatomes being used to assess regional anaesthetic blocks and
characteristically affected by shingles — a fundamental concept of practical
clinical use.
Describe the posterior parietal cortex and the integration of sensation.
Beyond the primary somatosensory cortex,
which receives and analyses the basic sensory information,
the posterior parietal cortex performs higher-order integration of sensation,
and understanding its role completes the account of somatosensory processing and
explains certain clinical disorders.
The primary somatosensory cortex receives the somatotopically-organised input and
performs the initial analysis of the basic features of sensation — the location,
intensity and quality.
From there, the information passes to the higher-order somatosensory association
areas, and to the posterior parietal cortex,
which integrates it further and combines it with other information.
The posterior parietal cortex performs several integrative functions:
it combines the different somatosensory submodalities,
and integrates the somatosensory information with the visual and other senses,
to build a coherent representation of the body and of the space around it;
it is involved in the awareness of the body and its position,
and in directing attention and guiding movement in space.
Damage to the posterior parietal cortex produces not a simple sensory loss but
disorders of integration and awareness:
a difficulty in recognising objects by touch despite intact basic sensation, and,
strikingly, neglect — an unawareness of one side of the body or of space — when the
non-dominant side is damaged.
So the posterior parietal cortex performs higher-order integration of sensation —
combining the somatosensory submodalities and integrating them with vision to build
a representation of the body and of surrounding space, supporting body awareness,
attention and the guidance of movement;
its damage causing disorders of integration and awareness,
such as tactile agnosia and neglect — the higher integration completing
somatosensory processing.
Describe the clinical testing of the somatosensory system.
The clinical examination of the somatosensory system tests its different
submodalities and pathways separately,
and understanding how follows directly from the physiology of the receptors and the
two ascending pathways, allowing lesions to be localised.
The examination tests the submodalities,
which travel by the two different pathways,
so that the pattern of loss localises the lesion.
The dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway is tested by the modalities it carries:
fine touch, by light touch with a wisp or monofilament; vibration,
by a tuning fork placed on a bony prominence; and proprioception,
or joint position sense, by moving a joint and asking the patient to detect the
direction.
The anterolateral, spinothalamic pathway is tested by the modalities it carries:
pain, by a pinprick; and temperature, by warm and cold objects.
The territory of the loss is mapped — against the dermatomes for a root or cord
lesion, against the peripheral nerve territories for a nerve lesion.
The pattern then localises the lesion: a peripheral nerve or root pattern;
a dermatomal sensory level indicating a cord lesion; and, importantly,
a dissociated loss — loss of pain and temperature on one side with loss of touch,
vibration and proprioception on the other — indicating a lesion of one half of the
cord, the Brown-Sequard pattern, because of the different crossings of the two
pathways.
So the somatosensory system is tested by examining its submodalities separately —
fine touch, vibration and proprioception for the dorsal column pathway,
and pinprick and temperature for the spinothalamic — and mapping the territory of
loss; the pattern localising the lesion,
with a dissociated loss indicating a hemisection of the cord,
the Brown-Sequard pattern — a clinical application following directly from the
sensory physiology.
Describe central, or thalamic, pain.
Pain can arise not only from the periphery and the pain pathway but from damage to
the central nervous system itself, and central pain, classically thalamic pain,
is an important and instructive example,
illustrating that pain can be generated centrally.
Central pain is a neuropathic pain caused by a lesion of the central nervous system
— the brain or the spinal cord — affecting the somatosensory pathways.
The classical form is thalamic pain, arising after a stroke damaging the thalamus,
the great sensory relay; but central pain can follow lesions at other sites,
including the spinal cord and the cortex.
Its features are characteristic of neuropathic pain: a spontaneous pain,
often severe and unpleasant, of a burning, aching or shooting quality,
felt in the part of the body whose sensory pathway is affected;
frequently accompanied by abnormal sensations,
and by the paradoxical combination of a reduced normal sensation in the area with
an increased and abnormal painful response — so that a light touch may be intensely
painful, allodynia.
The pain arises from the abnormal activity and processing in the damaged central
pathways, no longer requiring any peripheral input.
Like other neuropathic pain, it is often severe, persistent and difficult to treat,
responding poorly to conventional analgesics.
So central pain is a neuropathic pain from a lesion of the central nervous system
affecting the sensory pathways — classically thalamic pain after a stroke — with a
burning, spontaneous pain and allodynia in the affected area,
despite a reduced normal sensation;
arising from abnormal central processing without peripheral input,
and difficult to treat — an instructive demonstration that pain can be generated
centrally.
Describe the patterns of sensory loss in spinal cord lesions.
The patterns of sensory loss produced by lesions of the spinal cord follow directly
from the anatomy of the two ascending pathways and their different crossings,
and recognising them is a valuable clinical application of the sensory physiology,
so it is worth setting out the principal patterns.
Because the dorsal column pathway ascends ipsilaterally and crosses high,
while the spinothalamic pathway crosses low, near its entry,
lesions of the cord produce characteristic, often dissociated, patterns.
A complete transection causes a loss of all sensation below the level.
A hemisection — the Brown-Sequard syndrome — causes a dissociated loss:
a loss of fine touch, vibration and proprioception on the same side as the lesion,
below it, because the dorsal column fibres ascend uncrossed;
and a loss of pain and temperature on the opposite side,
because the spinothalamic fibres have crossed — together with motor signs.
A central cord lesion, as in syringomyelia,
affecting the fibres crossing in the centre of the cord,
causes a loss of pain and temperature in the affected segments,
with preservation of touch and proprioception — a dissociated,
suspended sensory loss.
A dorsal column lesion causes a loss of fine touch,
vibration and proprioception with preserved pain and temperature.
So spinal cord lesions produce patterns following from the pathways' crossings:
a transection causing loss of all sensation below;
a hemisection causing the dissociated Brown-Sequard pattern — ipsilateral loss of
touch and proprioception, contralateral loss of pain and temperature;
and a central lesion causing a suspended,
dissociated loss of pain and temperature — patterns that localise the lesion,
a valuable clinical application of the sensory pathways.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The somatosensory system detects touch, pressure, vibration, position,
temperature and pain via specific receptors,
carried by primary afferents (cell bodies in dorsal root ganglia) into the cord,
ascending by two pathway systems, relayed in the thalamus,
and projected to the somatotopically-organised somatosensory cortex (the sensory
homunculus — area proportional to sensory importance, not size).
Second, Sensory receptors transduce their adequate stimulus into a graded receptor
potential → action potentials whose frequency encodes intensity;
rapidly-adapting receptors signal change/movement/vibration,
slowly-adapting signal maintained stimuli;
each has a receptive field determining acuity.
Third, Cutaneous mechanoreceptors: Meissner corpuscles (rapidly-adapting,
light touch/flutter); Merkel cells (slowly-adapting, sustained pressure,
fine form/texture); Pacinian corpuscles (rapidly-adapting, deep, vibration);
Ruffini endings (slowly-adapting, skin stretch); plus hair follicle receptors.
Fourth, Two ascending pathways with different crossings:
the dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway (fine touch, vibration,
conscious proprioception) ascends ipsilaterally and crosses HIGH in the medulla — a
lesion below causes ipsilateral loss; the anterolateral/spinothalamic system (pain,
temperature, crude touch) crosses LOW in the cord near entry — a cord lesion causes
contralateral loss.
The different crossings explain dissociated sensory loss (Brown-Sequard).
Fifth, Both pathways relay in the thalamus (the great sensory relay,
except smell) to the somatosensory cortex.
Proprioception (position/movement) depends chiefly on muscle spindles (muscle
length), Golgi tendon organs (tension) and joint receptors — serving both conscious
appreciation (dorsal columns) and unconscious motor control (spinal reflexes,
cerebellum via spinocerebellar tracts).
Thank you. That concludes the station.